Add more details on the proposal. (#6)
WebAssembly/multibyte-array-access: proposals/multibyte-array-access/Overview.md

## Summary

Reuse the existing linear memory load/store instructions to allow multibyte access to Wasm GC numeric (and packed) array types (e.g., `i8`, `i16`, `i32`, `i64`, `f32`, `f64`).

## Motivation

A number of languages currently use GC arrays (such as `(array i8)` or arrays of other numeric types) as a backing store for custom data types and/or
byte buffers style objects (e.g., custom structs, Dart typed arrays, JVM byte arrays). Reading and
writing to these custom data types requires performing sequences of single-element operations that are
highly inefficient, and hinder performance.

## Proposal

### Semantics

The array versions of the load/store instructions follow the same data transformation semantics as the linear memory instructions, but they operate on GC arrays instead of linear memories.

#### Valid Array Types
- **Load instructions**: The array type `$t` must expand to `array (mut? t_elem)` where `t_elem` is a numeric type (`i8`, `i16`, `i32`, `i64`, `f32`, `f64`).

> - **Store instructions**: The array type `$t` must expand to `array (mut t_elem)` where `t_elem` is a numeric type (`i8`, `i16`, `i32`, `i64`, `f32`, `f64`).

Reviewer: Don't you want to include arrays of vector type (v128) as well? They are equally "transparent".

#### Validation

For type index `$t` and memory instruction `t_value.op`:
1. The type `$t` must be a valid type index in the module, and must expand to an array type.
2. The element type of the array must be a numeric type or packed numeric type.
3. If it is a store instruction, the array type must be mutable.
4. The instruction has the following input and output types on the stack:

>    - **Load** (`t_value.load`):

Reviewer: This can be `loadN_sx` for packed types. (Similarly for store.)

>      - Inputs: `[ref: (ref null $t), index: i32]`

Reviewer: Better call this "address" instead of "index". Both to match the terminology for memories, and because it does not match the array index in case of arrays with element type size > 1.

     - Outputs: `[val: t_value]`
   - **Store** (`t_value.store`):
     - Inputs: `[ref: (ref null $t), index: i32, val: t_value]`
     - Outputs: `[]`

>    - **Lane Load** (`v128.loadN_lane`):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - **Lane Load** (`v128.loadN_lane/spat/zero/xM_sx`):
```

     - Inputs: `[ref: (ref null $t), index: i32, vec: v128]`
     - Outputs: `[vec: v128]`
   - **Lane Store** (`v128.storeN_lane`):
     - Inputs: `[ref: (ref null $t), index: i32, vec: v128]`
     - Outputs: `[]`

#### Execution

> 1. **Null Validation**:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Null Check**:
```
(Validation is static checking.)

>    - If the array reference operand is null, execution traps with a null reference error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - If the array reference operand is null, execution traps.
```
(There is no notion of different errors in the core semantics.)

2. **Effective Address Calculation**:

>    - The effective address $ea$ is calculated as $index + offset$, where $index$ is the `i32` stack operand (interpreted as an unsigned 32-bit integer) and $offset$ is the static byte offset immediate from `memarg`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - The effective address $ea$ is calculated as $address + offset$, where $address$ is the `i32` stack operand (interpreted as an unsigned 32-bit integer) and $offset$ is the static byte offset immediate from `memarg`.
```

3. **Bounds Check**:

>    - Let $S$ be the size (in bytes) of the memory access (e.g., 4 for `i32.load`, 16 for `v128.load`).

Reviewer: For packed or lane-wise loads/stores, S equals N/8 for the N from the instruction mnemonic, not the size of t_value.

   - Let $L$ be the length of the array (obtained via `array.len`).
   - Let $E$ be the element size in bytes of the array type `$t` (e.g., 1 for `i8`, 2 for `i16`, etc.).

>    - The access is in bounds if $ea \ge 0$ and $ea + S \le L \times E$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - The access is in bounds if $ea + S \le L \times E$.
```
(Since all values are treated as unsigned, ≥ 0 is vacuously true.)

>    - If the access is out of bounds, execution traps with an out-of-bounds array access error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - If the access is out of bounds, execution traps.
```

4. **Operation**:

>    - **Load**: Reads $S$ bytes from the array payload starting at byte offset $ea$, decodes them using little-endian byte order, and pushes the resulting value onto the stack.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - **Load**: Reads $S$ bytes from the array payload starting at byte offset $ea$, decodes them using little-endian byte order, possibly extends them to the result size, and pushes the resulting value onto the stack.
```

>    - **Store**: Encodes the value operand into $S$ bytes using little-endian byte order, and writes them to the array payload starting at byte offset $ea$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - **Store**: Possibly wraps the value operand according to the target size, encodes it into $S$ bytes using little-endian byte order, and writes them to the array payload starting at byte offset $ea$.
```

>    - **Lane Operations**: Loads/stores a single lane of the vector operand from/to the array payload at byte offset $ea$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - **Lane Operations**: Loads/stores a single lane of the vector operand, possibly extended or wrapped, from/to the array payload at byte offset $ea$.
```

| `v128.load32x2_u` | SIMD | Load |
| `v128.load8_splat` | SIMD | Load (Splat) |
| `v128.load16_splat` | SIMD | Load (Splat) |
| `v128.load32_splat` | SIMD | Load (Splat) |
| `v128.load64_splat` | SIMD | Load (Splat) |
| `v128.load32_zero` | SIMD | Load (Zero) |
| `v128.load64_zero` | SIMD | Load (Zero) |
| `v128.load8_lane` | SIMD | Load (Lane) |
| `v128.load16_lane` | SIMD | Load (Lane) |
| `v128.load32_lane` | SIMD | Load (Lane) |
| `v128.load64_lane` | SIMD | Load (Lane) |
| `v128.store8_lane` | SIMD | Store (Lane) |
| `v128.store16_lane` | SIMD | Store (Lane) |
| `v128.store32_lane` | SIMD | Store (Lane) |
| `v128.store64_lane` | SIMD | Store (Lane) |

### Encoding

The array versions of the instructions reuse the existing opcodes for the standard memory instructions.

An instruction is determined to be an array access instruction if **bit 4** (value `0x10`) of the `flags` field in its `memarg` immediate is set.

When bit 4 of `flags` is set:
- The instruction operates on a GC array instead of linear memory.
- The `memarg` is parsed normally for `flags` and `offset` (both `u32` in LEB128). Bits 0-3 of `flags` represent the alignment exponent (expressed as `log_2(align)`).

> - **No memory index (`mem_idx`) is read/parsed**, even if bit 6 of `flags` is set. In a valid module, bit 6 of `flags` MUST be 0 when bit 4 is set. This avoids conflicts where the type index would be misparsed as a memory index.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- No memory index (`memidx`) is allowed. In a valid module, bit 6 of `flags` must be 0 when bit 4 is set. 
```
(Invalid modules aren't executed, so that part is irrelevant and misleading.)

- Immediately following the `memarg` fields (`flags` and `offset`), a `typeidx` (representing the type index of the array type `$t`) is encoded as a `u32` (LEB128).

> - For lane instructions (e.g., `v128.load8_lane`, `v128.store8_lane`), the 1-byte `laneidx` is encoded immediately *after* the `typeidx`.

Reviewer: This is already implied by the previous point, so could be dropped.

Thus, the binary format of a multibyte array instruction is:
`instr ::= op memarg_array typeidx` (for regular and SIMD load/store)

> `instr ::= op memarg_array typeidx laneidx` (for SIMD lane load/store)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`instr ::= op memarg` (for regular and SIMD load/store)
`instr ::= op memarg laneidx` (for SIMD lane load/store)
```

Where:

> - `memarg_array ::= flags:u32 offset:u32` (where `flags & 0x10 != 0`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `memarg ::= flags:u32 offset:u32 typeidx:u32` (where `flags & 0x50 = 0x10`)
```
(The memidx is [parsed as part of the memarg](https://webassembly.github.io/spec/core/binary/instructions.html#memory-instructions), so it makes sense to do the same for the typeidx.)
